# The State of the Road

**Table of Contents**

- [Where it's at](#Where%20it's%20at)
- [What's next](#What's%20next)
- [Ok I did it](#Ok%20I%20did%20it)

It's been a little longer than intended since my previous journal but what can you do.

The good news: The Priest of the Road *is ready for its first (semi-public) (sorta) release!*

The jam for which this game was created is ending (thanks to a gracious extension) in a few days. This is the first time I've seen an RPG writing project of anything resembling this scale to anything resembling completion, so that's cool! My sincerest thanks to momatoes and the other folks in the jam for the inspiration and motivation to see this through. Thanks also to the Bakers for giving me permission to hack their games and shamelessly reuse a bunch of their prose verbatim.

By "ready for release" I mean the game is complete enough that I think (hope) you could play it without me being there to explain it. I'm going to use this post to recap where the game is at, and what I'd like to work on next to get it "finished" finished. I'll include some ideas about extra stuff I could tack on after that.

## Where it's at

As you may recall, the game comprises 3 documents:

1. *The Priest of the Road:* containing character generation and most of the game's rules. I've never been totally happy with this document having the same name as the game itself, but it's stuck for lack of an alternative I like.
2. *Atlas of the Weave:* this game's big volunteer document, like the *Book of Doomed Wizards*. It's got guidance on answering questions about spirits, journeys, and charges, as well as a couple special procedures like the "Right of Supplication."
3. *Mapping the Way:* a mini-/sub-game for generating overland journeys. I wrote up a less cumbersome exertion as an alternative to *Mapping the Way* almost immediately after I finished it, and I'm not sure the mini-game actually needs to be in here at all. But I'm not ready to throw it out yet.

In addition to these, I now have 3 handouts: "The Woven World", an overview of the game's basic setting ideas akin to other *Grimoire* games' "A Bestiary"; A volunteer's guide, lifted pretty much(?) verbatim from *The Wizard's Grimoire* -- I honestly don't remember if I changed anything at all; and a character sheet for the Priest.

In terms of doneness, *Mapping the Way* has been "complete" since before I started this repo and I basically haven't touched it since. I'd call *Priest* feature-complete in that it has everything you need to play as described, besides the spawning circumstances, of which I don't have enough. The game also doesn't currently have anything in the way of advancement mechanics. Advancement is something I'm ambivalent about, because unlike other *Wizard's Grimoire* games this one is characterized by a kind of *cyclicality* rather than progress towards a goal. In *Priest* I allude to the notion that you might eventually be initiated into new arts, and I have other ideas about how a bigger narrative arc could spin out of the game's episodic structure, but none of those ideas are developed enough to include as such.

Of the three core documents, *Atlas of the Weave* is decidedly the least finished. It's currently full of placeholder headings, and only a handful of sections are actually developed enough to be much help to volunteers. Even its basic skeleton has changed a lot as my understanding of the game's focus and the areas where volunteers need help have evolved. At one point I imagined it as something much more like a literal atlas, with tables of geographical features and possible encounters filling most of its pages.

The biggest challenge to my thinking about the *Atlas* so far has been actually playtesting the game a couple times. In both instances, I found my volunteers were good enough at finding *something* to say about the landscape, about charges, destinations, encounters, etc., but tended to have trouble with the idea of *spirits.* These are one of the more abstract concepts in the game, and so a lot of my actual work on the *Atlas* ended up focusing on disambiguating spirits into something volunteers could play with. Ironically, the guidelines I created for coming up with spirits sort of double as a tools for imagining the landscape. Huh!

## What's next

There's obviously still quite a bit of work to do on the *Atlas*. My couple playtests so far have suggested that in addition to spirits, volunteers often have a hard time coming up with names for charges and places. I moved a bit in this direction, as well as making feeling the world a little more concrete, by including a list of six "Great Cities" in the *Atlas.* Some names for towns and people will probably help too!

While I could say I just need to fill in all the currently-empty headings and pick lists to call the game finished, I think a more enjoyable process would be to playtest it more, see where volunteers could use the extra help, and focus on providing that. This might also help generate new spawning circumstances and help me get a better sense of the longer arc of a priest's story.

In short: Play my game!!! Play it with me!!!! Please!!!!!

### Getting to "done"

So what might "finished" look like? Minimally, more spawning circumstances, and an *Atlas* without placeholders.

After that?? I guess try and make it look spiffy, maybe work on some illustrations. I don't really have any clear plans or desires to sell this thing, but I would like to get it into people's hands and see what they think! Because I think it's pretty neat!!

"Advancement" per se could be a post-release update or supplement if I can't sort it out. However, I'd like to at least have a better grasp on what (if) I want in terms of advancement before calling the base game finished.

### ...and beyond

This is incredibly tentative, but here are a bunch of the ideas that wound up on the cutting room floor that I'd still like to mess around with!

- **Guidance for "joining another's quest":** effectively, introducing the priest as a Companion in any other *Wizard's Grimoire* games. This was an early intention for this project (clerics are support characters, after all!) and still one I find interesting.
- **Factions:** Part of me is really intrigued by the idea of a priest getting pulled into sectarian struggles within the Order. I'm fascinated by the politics of religious schisms and that seems like a territory this game could explore. This could double as an Advancement thing -- you can learn new arts and whatnot as you move up the ranks of your faction. But a lot of these ingredients are still in the Hey That Would Be Cool section of my mental pantry and don't have a clear relationship to the themes and questions I wanted to foreground for this jam. So -- maybe some other time.
- **Monsters:** This is a section of the *Atlas* I eventually removed because it didn't really belong. I actually snuck it into the "misc" folder because I rather liked it! But like the factions, it didn't quite fit. If I ever decide to take this game in a more *Witcher*-y direction it'll have pride of place.

## Ok I did it

Yaayy!!! I made a thing!!! ok bye!!!!