# Hello world!
As I write this, I've already got a decent chunk of *The Priest of the Road* written. I have *most of* the core book drafted (with the notable exception of the section where you determine the priest's attributes). I have a skeleton for the volunteer book, *Atlas of the Weave*.  I even wrote (and lightly playtested) a sort of side game for plotting overland journeys, called *Mapping the Way*.

I started this project early, sort of by accident, and for the first few days rode a wave of excitement and focus as the big pieces and ideas rose to my mind. Now I'm at an academic conference where I don't have nearly as much time to work on it. I've also sort of exhausted that initial wave of excitement. So this seems like an opportune moment to step back and reflect.

I'd like to use this first journal to explain the basic premise of the game, take stock of my progress so far, articulate some of its big ideas, and connect those ideas to the jam theme of agency and asymmetry. Not necessarily in that order lol.

## The basic premise
The player assumes the role of a Priest of the Road. Their job is to help maintain the elaborate web of agreements among humans and spirits that help keep the roads safe for travelers, known as the Weave, and to help people traveling the roads. They're a sort of animist riff on the D&D cleric with a heavily sociological bent.

The Priest of the Road has a lot of social power, some magical power, and a lot of obligations expressed most concretely in their vows to their Order. The goal of this game is get the priest into sticky situations where the thing they ought to do isn't the necessarily the one they want to do, and play to see how they manage that tension.

It's also a game about road trips I guess.

## My progress so far
Current the game is comprised of the following documents:

*The Priest of the Road* is the "Core Rulebook" for this game.[^1] This is akin to the conjurer's booklet in *The Wizard's Grimoire*, the barbarian booklet in *The Barbarian's Bloody Quest*, etc. As a first draft, I'd say it's about 90% done. I think there's only one section left to write before it's fully playable, which I mentioned above.

The *Atlas of the Weave* is akin to the *Book of Doomed Wizards*. It's like a GM guide for the volunteers, which gives them procedures to follow and suggestions to prompt their inspiration -- as well as a few important procedures to follow under special circumstances.
### Wherein I digress about *Mapping the Way*
As I mentioned above, *Mapping the Way* is a sort of minigame for plotting overland journeys. I wrote it all at once while trying to figure out how to put the priest in a position where they could feel competent and in control while traveling on the open road. Drawing on my experiences with canoe camping, I decided some things that helps create this feeling is knowing where you're going, how far you've come, and what you might have to deal with along the way. Even better if you have enough information to make choices about your route.

It's also meant to help the volunteers: in my experiences running D&D, one of the hardest things to do is adding interest and texture to overland, especially on the fly. *Mapping the Way* therefore aims to simultaneously give the priest a sense of competence and provide the volunteers with concrete materials to build on by generating a map of the journey *as the priest understand it.*

When I playtested *Mapping the Way*, it took about half an hour, generated a pretty solid and interesting map, and was amusing if not excessively "fun".

That's pretty good! However, I worried that players might resent having to play a whole other game that could take upwards of 20 minutes, just to get a snapshot of the territory. I didn't want players balking on studying their route because it would take too long.

So I wrote up a shorter procedure called 'A Quick Refresher', as an exertion for the priest. When I tested it out, I found it provided satisfactory output (if a bit lower-res) with significantly less work. Oops!

Right now, the game leaves it to the players whether they want to play *Mapping the Way* or settle for 'A Quick Refresher'. It feels like a bit of a cop-out to me and sticks out as something I could do some more work on.
## The Big Ideas
Actually I don't think I can talk honestly about the big ideas without sharing a bit about where this game came from so I'm going to talk about that first.
### Where this game came from
Sometimes I play RPGs solo. When I do, I pull from a small roster of characters bumping around my head, porting them from system to system and sending them on little adventures as I fancy. The Priest of the Road is one of those characters. He's been in my head since, idk, 2012 or something? When I play him, his name is Aaio.

When I got home from Bonn I was very hyped about *The Wizard's Grimoire*, and it wasn't long before I started thinking about soloing it.[^2] It wasn't much longer before I started thinking about using it with Aaio -- but oh hey, no Cleric! I started tweaking it. I didn't stop. Thus was born *The Priest of the Road*.

All this to say I fell into this project somewhat by accident, and with the benefit of a deep well of character details, play stories, themes, and worldbuilding to draw from. I didn't mean for this to be my jam game.

### The Big Ideas For Real This Time, or, Why This Is My Jam Game (and therefore This Is The Section About Agency)
One of the things that interests me about the Priest of the Road is the tense, ambivalent place they occupy between freedom, obligation, and (dare I say it?) ~~dependency~~ contingency.

They are free insofar as they can go, broadly, wherever they please. Wherever they go, they enjoy considerable social privileges and moral authority.[^3] The work they do is important to the people they meet, their skills invaluable, and their privilege backed by a massive and well-connected organization. Between their training, their powers, and their status, priests of road are rarely out of their element. That's why I cared so much about making the priest feel smart and capable that I made a whole minigame about it.

However, they are regularly obliged to relinquish their autonomy to other forces. Wherever they go, priests might be expected to perform whatever rites and obeisances are required to keep the spirits of the Weave happy. They might find themselves suddenly saddled with a petitioner -- and if they refuse the petition, with a supplicant,[^4] and that *really* curtails their discretion. While so charged, the priest might have to make all kinds of promises and compromises to whatever people and spirits they must deal with in the course of their duties. These dealings must, furthermore, accord with the Weave, the complex system of agreements between humans and spirits from which the priest and their order draw their authority *and* their supernatural powers. If a priest violates the Weave, they risk the discipline and worse. In this sense, *The Priest of the Road* takes up the sociologist's refrain that human agency embodies, and is often overtaken by, broader social forces.[^5] This is why the priest's player has very little control over who their charges are, what the spirits want, and what the Weave asks of them in any given scenario. Those are left to the volunteers.

These privileges and obligations make up a situation where the priest's considerable power and social autonomy is constantly circumscribed by arrangements that predate and supercede them and circumstances beyond their control. Add to the equation that these forces often require (or at least encourage) the priest to do things that are dangerous, inconvenient, and/or counter to their better judgment -- in the form of willful spirits and morally gray charges.

This isn't to say the priest has no control over what they do. It's in this interest that I made the Weave to be a fundamentally social and material force, rather than a magical or metaphysical one. It's bound by norms and consensus, not spells. Spirits and people are fallible and can't punish a transgression they don't hear about. So in an ideal game, there's a push and pull between the priest embracing their privileges and obligations, and looking for the gaps in which they can be their own person.

So far I haven't really given the priest a goal besides, well, being the priest. That's already a big ask! Ultimately one of the big questions facing the player is how much they want to let the title define them, and what they're willing to do to define the title for themselves.

All this adds up to a vision of agency steeped in social pressures. You have considerable power you can throw around -- but if you push too hard against using it "as intended", you risk losing it all.

## Next steps
I'm getting sleepy and tired of writing this, so I'll keep this final section short.[^6] Going into this journal I felt like I was losing steam in the face of all the things I *could* do next -- flesh out a framework volunteers can use to stage incidents on the road; a kind of catalogue of dangers and opportunities to populate maps; some campaign-level stuff about factions and further priest powers; etc. I think writing this has helped me hone in on where my attention matters most for the themes I want to work with.

Namely, I'm seeing that a lot of the player-facing elements I've left for last are possibly some of the most load-bearing when it comes to these questions. The section for determining your qualities, beyond just giving a series of choices between one stat and the other, should give players a sense of the kinds of tough decisions that define being the priest. The spawning scenarios -- which, my god, I forgot to even mention before now -- are also critical in setting up the kinds of situations where these problems of agency can come to the fore.

On the volunteer side, I still need to do some thinking about where to focus. So far this has been a secondary priority and also a bit of an afterthought. Many sections in the current *Atlas* began as portions of *Priest*. There is so much more I *could* put in the *Atlas*. But that's all the more reason to focus on emphasizing the things that will help the volunteers set the priest up to crash headfirst into compromising situations and cutting out whatever distracts from that. I think I could start with a framework (or frameworks) for determining the consequences of violating the Weave. I'm still not sure whether I want to have separate sections for the Order's discipline and the wrath of spirits. Ultimately, they are closely related and the volunteers should have tools for both.

It occurs, in fact, that a clearer fictional understanding of those aspects of the priest's world will probably help filling out the remaining sections of the priest booklet. So maybe it's time to give some attention to the volunteer book.

[^1]: I'm not sure I want this book to have the same title as the game. I'm also not sure I like the title.
[^2]: I think these games are extraordinarily well suited to solo play, but that's a topic for another journal.
[^3]: It's occured to me more than once that I'm hacking one Baker game to make something not unlike Dogs in the Vineyard. I try not to think about it too hard.
[^4]: 'The Right of Supplication', possibly my favourite piece of design in this project thus far, flips the usual script between player and volunteers -- specifically in order to underscore how it subverts the priest's autonomy.
[^5]: During the conference Jay and I got to talking about a game they wanted to make where player characters are represented as expressions of various social forces. I have to imagine some of that conversation found its way in here, too.
[^6]: lmao