# Designing for Informational Asymmetry

**Table of Contents**

- [Informational Asymmetry](#Informational%20Asymmetry)
- [Just make the player do it???](#Just%20make%20the%20player%20do%20it???)
- [Applying These Lessons](#Applying%20These%20Lessons)
- [Next Steps](#Next%20Steps)

Progress has been slow the last few days. Part of that is most of my days have been spent conferencing, or being exhausted from conferencing. But I've also been struggling to make progress on the game even when I *do* have the time and energy. The purpose of this journal is to try to figure out what's blocking me.

As I mentioned in [my previous journal](2024-06-19.md), I'm trying to develop the themes of freedom, obligation, and contingency through aspects of the setting that lie *beyond the priest themself*. Looking a little closer now, I also realize that the elements I'm working on have to do with *willful actors* in the priest's world, e.g. spirits, the Order, and charges. Because these actors are willful, they are outside the priest's direct control. They can act independent of, and even against the priest. This means responsibility for these actors needs to fall on the volunteers.

In *The Wizard's Grimoire* games, volunteers have a pretty easy job. They're given a lot of leeway to invent answers that are fun, and are well scaffolded by the player in doing so without too much difficulty. In certain games, like *The Barbarian's Bloody Quest* and *The Last Adventure*, the additional materials like *The Book of Doomed Wizards* give the volunteers more structured prompts to help them with thematically important elements. They also provide some state tracking tools.

Fundamentally, both of these problems are about how information moves around the table. They're about making sure the game provides the right tools to the players and volunteers so that each is equipped with the knowledge and guidance they need to bring these elements to life.

There are other challenges as well, pertaining to how volunteers generate answers to open-ended or heavily setting-specific question. However, for the purposes of this entry I'm going to focus on distribution of instructional and "off-stage" information.[^1]

## Informational Asymmetry
A design challenge particular to *The Priest of the Road* is that it requires the volunteers to track, and sometimes decide upon, information that influences the story but is not directly available to the priest and may not immediately impact them.

A good example of this is when the priest breaks their vows or otherwise violates the Weave, which risks getting them in trouble with their Order. Discipline usually isn't immediate, but it shouldn't be entirely arbitrary, either. It requires a kind of "memory" so that violations in one session can be felt in future sessions. The priest also doesn't necessarily know if their violation will be punished at all -- they can't get in trouble if no one tells on them.

The question, then, is how do I help the volunteers track those decisions across multiple sessions, possibly passing them off to other volunteers in the process? This is compounded by the fact that the volunteers should ideally be informed by the priest when they need to consult the relevant records -- I like how chill the volunteer experience is for this game, and I want to preserve that as much as possible!

## Just make the player do it???
I think the answer is to put as much long-term state tracking onto the player as possible. Anything that can't be easily reflected by, say, marking checkboxes on a picklist that a volunteer would have reason to consult anyway.[^2]

To think though this issue I'm looking to a couple examples for other *Wizard's Grimoire* texts (be warned, spoilers abound).

The first is the Scampering Lantern from *The Wizard's Library* (and reproduced in part in *The Booked of Doomed Wizards*). I'm going to focus on the latter instantiation because it's more volunteer-facing. The flow of information goes something like this:

- The volunteers tell the player they get the Scampering Lantern. They also fill out a little sheet for it, which lives in the *Book of Doomed Wizards*.
- The volunteers' instructions for the Scampering Lantern inform them they have "a new, additional duty" to "keep \[it] in mind, and to tell the barbarian, even unasked, where \[it is] and what \[it's] doing now".
- The player is probably extremely excited about having a Scampering Lantern and won't need much reminding in the short term. They can also write it down on their character sheet.
- In future sessions, the player will likely mention the lantern at various moments. If they're playing with the same volunteers, they likely won't need reminding because the Lantern is delightful. Otherwise, it's the player's job to remind their volunteers that the lantern exists and is described in the *Book of Doomed Wizards*.

The Lantern gets a lot of mileage out of being just a really fun thing to imagine. Once the image is in your head you probably won't have a hard time remembering it, and it's an attractive thing to think about. In that sense, in addition to scampering around, the Lantern carries a bit of its own cognitive load. What a cutie.

It's also a visible thing the player carries with them. The player will likely *want* to talk about the lantern and use it in various ways. In other words, the Lantern is an easy think to keep in play because it sticks in the mind. It's *sticky.*

This doesn't apply as readily to something like the question of whether the priest is in trouble...

In *The Barbarian's Bloody Quest*, lots of the information the player needs to remind the volunteers about isn't delightful, sticky, or obvious, at least for the barbarian. Dealing with wizards often triggers retribution from unseen forces, such as the wizard's safeguards and guardians. The barbarian's exertions include reminders of this, as well as directions to give the volunteers about what portions of the *Book of Doomed Wizards* to consult. The lesson here is to build reminders into player-facing rules.

## Applying These Lessons
To put this to work, let's have a look at my rules for the priest getting in trouble -- the 'Discipline of the Order' section in the *Atlas of the Weave*.

But first, here's a quick review of lessons learned so far:
1. Use simple trackers to help the volunteers record "off-stage" developments across sessions.
2. Allow the volunteers to defer detailed conversations about "off-stage" information until it comes into play.
3. The volunteers can be given new duties, but may need reminding of those from session to session.
4. Build reminders about volunteer-facing mechanics into player-facing rules.

For 'The Order's Discipline', as written, the flow of information goes something like this:

- The player informs the volunteers that they've violated the Weave and risk getting in trouble.
- The volunteers decide whether the violation has been reported. They can also defer the decision until later if it isn't clear, or if the priest wouldn't know.
- Either way, the volunteers can mark that a violation has been reported, quietly flagging it for disciplinary action in future.

That's about as far as it goes. Based on the above, the problem remains that volunteers in future sessions won't necessarily know if the priest has any violations pending discipline.

As I write this, I'm putting the above lessons to work to address this problem as follows:

- Adding language to the session start instructions in *Priest* that cues the volunteers to check 'The Order's Discipline'. This way the volunteers will know whether the there are any pending disciplinary actions to bring into play.
- Adding instructions in 'The Order's Discipline' for volunteers checking it at the start of a session, explaining what to do if there are pending actions.
- Working language about "additional duties" into 'The Order's Discipline' so volunteers have a clear idea of what to do with pending actions.

I'm still not 100% happy with how these are implemented, but I think it's a step in the right direction.

## Next Steps
Something else I'm struggling with but didn't have time to engage with today is *generativity.* A number of the 'willful actors' in the game, like charges and spirits, can take on any number of forms. Each charge is unique, and the priest will meet vastly different spirits as they travel from place to place. It's important that they be distinct and impactful. That's a lot to put on a volunteer! I want to provide effective scaffolding so volunteers can generate these actors quickly and, ideally, have fun in the process. I think my next step, then, should be to really focus on one of these elements, either charges or spirits.

A last thought I'm having is that if I'm running out of steam, I might also have reached something like the limit of my ability to make decisions about this game based on theory and inspiration alone. It might be time to playtest and see what's working and where the pain points are. Also, playing is fun!

[^1]: A quick peek behind the curtain: Lest you think my mind is even remotely organized, I actually set out to solve like 3 different problems with this entry. I revised this section near the end of the drafting process when I realized I'd only dealt with one of those problems, had been writing for hours, and wanted to go to bed. Several partly-written sections were cut out entirely, their scraps salvaged for future entries.

[^2]: In a certain corner of RPG-land we call this kind of important-but-indeterminate content "quantum" and tend to think of it as a bad thing. A good way to understand why quantum information is "bad" would be to read up on [The Blorb Principles](https://idiomdrottning.org/blorb-principles), with particular attention to the section on the 'Three Tiers of Truth'. I keep having to remind myself that as much as I love blorb games, this isn't a blorb game and that its principles don't apply here. Old habits die hard.